[Volume:652;Page:1538]


12.
 
JACINDA ARDERN (Labour) to the
 Minister of Youth Affairs: Does she agree with the statement by the Principal Youth Court Judge, Andrew Becroft, that boot camps for young offenders are “arguably the least successful sentence in the Western world”; if not, why not?


Hon PAULA BENNETT (Minister of Youth Affairs)
: Yes, I agree with Judge Becroft. That is why we are not following that model.

Jacinda Ardern: Does the Minister agree, then, with the statement made by her leader, John Key, that the Government’s programme would require young people who are serious offenders to take part in military-style activity programmes run by the army, using army-type facilities or training methods? And if she does not think that is a boot camp, then what is it?

Hon PAULA BENNETT: Yes, I do agree with the Prime Minister. In fact, I have seen a
 Waikato Times
 editorial that says that National has done its homework on this policy. The editorial states: “A boot camp on its own will achieve nothing, but combined with mentoring, drug and alcohol rehabilitation and educational programmes it is better than sitting idly by as young thugs turn into older thugs.”

Simon Bridges: What reports has the Minister seen on what works for young offenders?

Hon PAULA BENNETT: We know that the thousand worst offenders that Fresh Start targets need a programme of long-term, wraparound care, intensive monitoring, self-discipline, personal responsibility, drug and alcohol treatment, and parenting skills.

Jacinda Ardern: Does she know what her mentoring programmes for young offenders will involve, given they are such an integral part of her Government’s recent bill, or does she stand by her statement made at the Rotorua youth planning day that mentoring is “just another fancy word”?

Hon PAULA BENNETT: Yes, I do stand by what we need to do as far as mentoring programmes are concerned. We are going to make sure they are truly effective, and not just about words but about action. The simple truth is that if we keep doing the same stuff, we will get the same results. This Government says that is not good enough.

Simon Bridges: Why is the Minister proposing changes to the Youth Court’s powers?

Hon PAULA BENNETT: We know that the system works for the majority of young people, but there are a small group of recidivist serious offenders. We listened to feedback from the judiciary, which wanted a wider range of tools to individualise sentences. It also wanted longer sentences, to have the chance to make a real difference in those offenders’ lives. That is what we are giving the judiciary.