[Volume:672;Page:18420]


10.
JACINDA ARDERN (Labour) to the
 Minister for Social Development and Employment: Does she stand by her statement that “this Government is backing young people to gain skills and the confidence that gets them real jobs in go-ahead industries”; if so, does she believe youth unemployment rates reflect this?


Hon PAULA BENNETT (Minister for Social Development and Employment)
: Yes. I stand by all my statements, especially this one: “this John Key - led Government is backing young people to gain skills and the confidence that gets them real jobs in go-ahead industries”. In response to the second part of the member’s question, I believe that the rates would be significantly worse if it were not for the initiatives of this Government.

Jacinda Ardern: Has unemployment for 15 to 24-year-olds increased by 53 percent since she became Minister; if not, what is the correct figure?

Hon PAULA BENNETT: Yes, but we have also seen in the last 12 months an increase in employment for young people; 4,000 more young people are in employment in the last year. As we saw today in the announcement of the household labour force survey, more people are participating and want to be in there. We have a lot of work to do; there is no doubt about that. Young people are most affected by a recession. That is why we are making investments like $55.2 million in programmes that we think will substantially make a difference.

Jacinda Ardern: Has the Ministry of Social Development’s overall budget increased as a result of the youth unemployment package she announced yesterday?


Hon PAULA BENNETT: Yes. We have taken money from other areas as well as from within the employment assistance package. Within the area of youth unemployment, we will see that $55.2 million making a difference.

Jacinda Ardern: What programmes were cut in order to fund the youth unemployment package?

Hon PAULA BENNETT: We reprioritised within the ministry in some respects, as well. Programmes like Cadet MAX do a really good job of working directly with employers, but we want to get that New Zealand Qualifications Authority accreditation right next to it and get that training with them as well, so that young people do not just get the jobs in industries where they are really needed, but also are able to stay in employment for a longer term. It has been a reprioritisation within—

Sue Moroney: Not answering the question.

Hon PAULA BENNETT: I have just talked about Cadet MAX; I have just talked about jobs for the future and said that we have changed how that dynamic works. We have taken those sorts of programmes and made sure that they have the skills and training component next to them.

Carmel Sepuloni: Which would provide better long-term employment prospects for the 40,000 15 to 24-year-old unemployed Māori and Pacific: industry training, which the Minister cut $55 million from last year, or Limited Service Volunteers 6-week military courses, which the Minister has just put $25 million into?

Hon PAULA BENNETT: It would help if the member got her facts right. I am the Minister for Social Development and Employment, and not the Minister responsible for the Tertiary Education Commission, which relates to the $55 million that she is talking about. That figure, of course, was not cut but reprioritised into areas of university training, which absolutely made a difference. Those places were not being taken up. They were not being used; we are now absolutely using them. We have more people in university now, which makes a difference. The member does not get many questions; one would think—

Mr SPEAKER: Order!

Hon David Parker: I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. We deserve—[Interruption]

Mr SPEAKER: Order!

Hon David Parker: We deserve plenty of extra—

Mr SPEAKER: I ask the member to resume his seat. I was going to try to quieten the House so the point of order could be heard in silence, but because he kept speaking when I was on my feet, I am afraid he has just lost that privilege.

Hon David Parker: I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Gratuitous insults from that Minister should not have to be put up with by the Opposition. [Interruption]

Mr SPEAKER: That was a point of order, and the point is reasonably made. The question was asked and the Minister disputed the facts contained in it. She is perfectly entitled to do that. But the question did not really deserve quite that kind of comment. At the same time, where questioners allege that a Government has cut money where a Government considers that it has not, they can expect fairly robust responses.

Hon Trevor Mallard: I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. It is really just a question on the processes that you want when we are dealing with these matters. I think all of us agree that you have tended to let things flow and play advantage—that sort of approach. The question is whether, when there is that sort of comment—which, I think, none of us think is appropriate—we should take a point of order, or whether you might intervene yourself.

Hon Paula Bennett: Point of order—


Mr SPEAKER: I do not think that is necessary, to be honest—[Interruption] The Minister should know that members do not interject, on either side of the House. I reacted immediately to the comment but it was too late to stop it. I quickly assessed how bad it was, and decided, given the question asked, that I would let it go. But I respect the fact that objection was taken to it. That is why I have asked the Minister to refrain from making that kind of comment unless severely provoked; I do not think that question severely provoked the Minister.

Rahui Katene: Does she agree with the view of Ngāi Tahu leader Mark Solomon that the reconstruction of Christchurch should be used as a gigantic trades training programme; if so, will she be prepared to provide assistance to Ngāi Tahu in their efforts to see a trades training initiative become a success?

Hon PAULA BENNETT: As indicated by the Prime Minister yesterday, there will be announcements on trades and skills in Christchurch in the very near future. But I know that this Government would certainly like to continue working in partnership with Ngāi Tahu in the work they are doing. So we will continue those conversations and hope that we see some outcomes from them.