[Volume:670;Page:17082]



JACINDA ARDERN (Labour)
: I appreciate the solidarity that Mr Chairperson Tisch has shown as a former resident of the Piako area—and I am a former constituent of his, as it so happens. Perhaps that is the reason why I felt moved to speak on the Hamilton City Council (Parana Park) Land Vesting Bill, and specifically on the bill’s title.
I grew up in Morrinsville, and I like to clarify that because often people think that that just means I grew up in Hamilton. But they are two very different things, when one is from Morrinsville. However Hamilton was the nearest city, so the recreation areas of Hamilton, I think, were still very important to us. Of course, a trip to Hamilton was very special—so deprived was my upbringing. It was a significant move from the time I lived in Murupara, when a trip to Rotorua for the groceries was the highlight of the calendar month. But the point I wanted to make was that upon hearing Darien Fenton’s contribution, in which she delved into the history of both Parana Park and Hamilton, I wanted to come to the Chamber and explore whether some options for naming existed within those questions that Darien asked. I believe that she asked whether we should be putting into the title, perhaps, the history of the word “Hamilton” itself, and I am not sure whether that question has been answered yet. I have not been able to find the history behind “Hamilton”, but of course Kirikiriroa, the Māori name for Hamilton, actually means “long stretch of gravel”. I decided that on that basis I would not suggest that we call the bill the “Long Stretch of Gravel Park Bill”. The name was not really synonymous with the idea of a park, so I will not propose that. But I thought it was interesting that Morrinsville, one of the nearest townships, is a swamp, so the combination of a long stretch of gravel with a swamp is almost a match made in roading heaven.
I do not propose to rename the bill the “Long Stretch of Gravel (City Council) Parana Park Land Vesting Bill”, so I explored some other options based on a Wikipedia entry. Members will be interested to know that some of Hamilton’s nicknames are included in the Wikipedia entry on Hamilton. On this occasion I have not turned to Wikipedia for policy advice, as Bill English has done in the past, but I thought that from a creative perspective it might help us with the naming, the title, of this bill. So some options include “Hamiltron”, “the Tron”—I thank Sue Moroney—

Iain Lees-Galloway: City of the Future?

JACINDA ARDERN: “City of the Future” is not named, so we will not be using that as a potential title. There was “H-Town”, “The Fountain City”, which is obvious, and “Cowtown”. That is not one I have heard before, and I do not suggest to members
 that we adopt that lingo. Again, I did not think that any of those did justice as a title, so I will ignore those nicknames, as well.

I think that perhaps the best contribution for a potential title was from Nanaia Mahuta, who explored the history of Parana Park and its surrounding area, and I think she captured the significance of its placement and its space. When we look at the original history—because that was another area where I looked for a more fitting title for this bill—we find the idea that Parana Park was intended to be a children’s convalescent home and playground. I note that the commentary on the bill now mentions that “Parana Park is currently used for passive recreation,”. I would quite like to know whether the member Mr Bennett could inform us of the criteria for passive recreation, as opposed to active recreation. I would not like to explore, necessarily, the difference between passive and active recreation, but I think it is important that we title the bill appropriately so that in future no one feels obliged to move into active recreation, because that would obviously be outside Parliament’s intent for that park. If the member would clarify that, I would be very grateful; that would assist with the title of this bill, which is incredibly important to this Parliament.