[Volume:661;Page:9688]



JACINDA ARDERN (Labour)
: I said before the debate on this bill was interrupted that I would of course return to the House to use my remaining 2 minutes to speak to this bill. The bill essentially allows a widening of the use of video conferencing facilities in our court service—a critical issue of debate. I have to say I would rather have spent my 2 minutes and 30 seconds debating the important matter of mining, but that is how these things go.
I conclude my consideration of this bill by saying that it seems to me that building efficiencies into the court system—and I can only assume that this is part of the Government’s agenda with this bill—is part of the purpose of the use of this new technology. The one warning I offered in the initial part of my contribution was that in the United Kingdom a similar form of technology was used for a pilot programme called Virtual Courts. The idea from the perspective of UK lawmakers was to replace some of the early court proceedings with video conferencing, which meant that prisoners would not have to be transported. The idea was that money would be saved as a consequence. That has not been the outcome of that system for those who introduced it, and they are still working on finding cost savings through that pilot programme. So I issue a word of warning to the Government: if cost saving is the primary purpose of this initiative, it may wish to cost more effectively—because it has not done so in the
 regulatory impact statement—the savings and the benefits of the system, because it comes at another cost.

We have to be very careful to ensure that we balance out the striving for efficiency gains in our court system, which is under a lot of pressure, with the idea that we do not undermine the very important principle of justice and giving all people their day in court, so to speak. That has been very roughly cast out in this bill, but it has been done through a set of criteria. It strikes me that there is still the ability, even where evidence has been heard in a court case, for a potential defendant not to be present. If that is the case, I think we should be very aware of the fact that there is a balance to be struck, and we will be looking for that balance in the select committee process. Thank you.