[Volume:660;Page:8737]


12.
JACINDA ARDERN (Labour) to the
 Minister of Youth Affairs: Does she agree with commentator Bernard Hickey that the Prime Minister’s statement yesterday sent a clear message to young New Zealanders: “leave the country now”?


Hon PAULA BENNETT (Minister of Youth Affairs)
: No, I do not. In fact, under the National Government more New Zealanders are choosing to come home and stay home than ever before. Bernard Hickey is throwing his toys because he wanted us to take a much more radical approach to economic reform. He wants the Government to increase the retirement age and drop superannuation from 66 percent—

Hon Trevor Mallard: I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I wonder whether the expression “throwing his toys” in reference to an outside commentator is an appropriate expression to use in this House.

Mr SPEAKER: Let us just settle down and not get too pedantic. I do not think there is anything wrong with suggesting someone outside this place may have thrown his toys. I do not think it is as insulting as that.

Hon PAULA BENNETT: Bernard Hickey has thrown his toys because he wanted us to take a much more radical approach to economic reform. He wants the Government to increase the retirement age, to drop superannuation from 66 percent, to bring in a capital gains tax, to ration health care, and to have a flat tax. I was not expecting the Labour Party to listen to Bernard Hickey; I did not know it was its policy.

Jacinda Ardern: How does she reconcile her answer with the
 New Zealand Herald
 article 10 days ago in which she was reported to already be concerned by the number of young people who see their future overseas?

Hon PAULA BENNETT: We want more New Zealanders to be in New Zealand. But New Zealanders have always done an OE and picked up a lot of skills and an amazing international experience. I think under a National Government we are seeing more of them coming home because this is where they want to be.


Jacinda Ardern: Have her views on Kiwis going abroad changed since the Prime Minister’s statement, in which he offered no new ideas to reduce record high levels of youth unemployment and, according to commentators, “He is saying to a generation unlucky enough not to own property … that they can give up on their dream of family homeownership.”?

Hon PAULA BENNETT: New Zealanders are aspirational and so are young New Zealanders. They believe in themselves and their capability to earn a living and make something of themselves. They know that this country is the place to do it and that this Government is the one to deliver them tax reforms that will mean something.

Jacinda Ardern: I seek the leave of the House to table an article in the
 New Zealand Herald
 entitled—[Interruption]

Mr SPEAKER: A point of order was called and the member’s own colleagues were still interjecting. It is the first question time of the year, I know, but we have not been very brilliant today.

Jacinda Ardern: I seek leave to table an article titled “Minister concerned about youth intentions” from the
 New Zealand Herald,dated 1 February.

Mr SPEAKER: Is this an article from a recent
 New Zealand Herald?

Jacinda Ardern: It is.

Mr SPEAKER: Well, we are not going to do that.